# DBMG: Dual-Branch Mask-Guided Framework for Virtual HER2 Immunohistochemical Staining of Breast Tissue

## Abstract

One of the primary bases for breast cancer diagnosis is the expression level of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), which relies on immunohistochemical (IHC) staining—a process that is time-consuming and labor-intensive in clinical practice. Virtual staining technology achieves rapid and automated HER2 staining by transforming hematoxylin and eosin (H\&E) images into IHC images via deep learning networks. However, a core issue persists in existing virtual staining methods: inadequate feature extraction capability for tumor cell, making it difficult to generate accurate, complete, high-quality membranous protein expression. To address this, we propose a Dual-Branch Mask-Guided network architecture (DBMG). Specifically, under the primary framework of Generative Adversarial Network (GAN), we separate the protein expression from real IHC stains and partition them into masks. These masks serve as real physical guidance, optimizing the generator network’s capability for classifying and segmenting breast cancer tumor cell features, while also providing the local branch of the discriminator network with a real-signal field of view to constrain the generated HER2 protein to have an authentic distribution and expression. Extensive experiments demonstrate that, compared to existing methods, the virtual IHC images generated by our proposed DBMG architecture achieve optimal results in both the spatial distribution of HER2 membrane protein expression and its consistency with pathological features. This highlights its clinical application potential comparable to that of real IHC staining.

## Environment

1. conda Environment:

```bash
conda create -n DBMG
conda activate DBMG
pip install --upgrade pip
pip install -r requirements
```

2. PyTorch:

This project is developed based on the PyTorch framework. Please visit the official website https://pytorch.org/get-started to download the appropriate version.

2. CONCH Weight:

To use the CONCH weights, please first ensure that Git is installed from https://git-scm.com/install, and then apply for the weights according to the instructions at https://huggingface.co/MahmoodLab/CONCH.

### Prepare the HER2match Dataset

1. Download Dataset:

(1)The HER2match dataset is available at: https://zenodo.org/records/15797050.

(2)It can also be downloaded by using the wget command in the terminal with the following instruction:

```bash
wget 'https://zenodo.org/record/15797050/files/tiles.zip?download=1' -O HER2match_tiles.zip
unzip HER2match_tiles.zip -d HER2match_tiles
```

2. Create mask folder:
After successfully downloading the HER2match dataset, please execute the following command to generate mask files to the specified path:

```bash
python data/mask.py
```

3. Full data directory structure:
data/
├── dataloder.py                 # Data loading and preprocessing
├── mask.py                      # Mask generation
│
└── HER2match/                   # Core paired dataset
    ├── HE/                      # Source domain A: H&E histopathology images
    │   ├── train/
    │   │   └── ...
    │   ├── val/      
    │   │   └── ...             
    │   └── test/   
    │       └── ...                
    │
    ├── IHC/                     # Target domain B: IHC histopathology images (e.g., HER2)
    │   ├── train/
    │   │   └── ...
    │   ├── val/      
    │   │   └── ...             
    │   └── test/   
    │       └── ...               
    │
    └── mask/                    # Path for saving the generated mask files.
        └── ...              


4. Modify the `config.yaml` file by inserting the full path to the dataset in the following parameters:
- train_dataroot_A/B
- val_dataroot_A/B
- test_dataroot_A/B
- train_mask_root_B


### Train Models
1. Modify the `config.yaml` file in the following parameters to ensure the program runs correctly:

- save_dir
- valid_output_dir
- csv_path
- world_size

All other parameter settings should remain consistent with your task.

2. Run

```bash
python train.py
```

### Test Models
1. Modify the `config.yaml` file in the following parameters to ensure the program runs correctly:

- save_path
- test_output_dir

All other parameter settings should remain consistent with your task.

2. Run
```bash
python test.py
```

### Eval Models

Before running, please ensure that the generated results from the network to be evaluated have been saved:

1. metrics:

The computation of experimental evaluation metrics is implemented through the following command:

```bash
python eval_metrics.py
```

2. Pathological consistency analysis:

To perform the pathological consistency analysis described in the paper, please execute the following command:

```bash
python eval_pathology.py
```